Computer and Network Security
Dr. Chan Yeob Yeun


Week 12
Weekly Lecture Plan
     Wk          Contents             Cmt       Wk               Contents               Cmt
     1    Introduction                          9    Foundations of Network
                                                     Security II

     2    Foundations of           Tutorial     10   Network-Based Threats and
          Computer Security        Assig Plan        Attacks

     3    Identification and                    11   Network Security Protocols I
          Authentication I

     4    Identification and       Quiz 1       12   Network Security Protocols II   Quiz 3
          Authentication II
     5    Access Control                        13   Firewalls


     6    Modern Computer                       14   IDS / IPS                       Assig
          Attacks                                                                    Submit


     7    Malicious Code           Assig        15   Revision and Presentation
                                   Confirm


     8    Foundations of Network   Quiz 2       16   Exam
          Security I




P2
What is Network Security ?

      Physical     Datalink   Network     Transport     Session Presentation Application

      Layer 1      Layer 2     Layer 3    Layer 4       Layer 5    Layer 6      Layer 7




 Confidentiality       Authentication     Integrity     Non-repudiation      Access Control


     Encryption          Authentication     Data           Digital
                         Exchange           Integrity      Signature         Access Control
Traffic Control

     Routing Control                                       Notarizations          DoS


          Trust         Security Label       Detection       Anti-Spam           Recovery




P3
Network Device Security

 Switch and Router Basics
     – Switches
     – Routers
     – Routing Protocols
 Network Hardening
     –   Patches
     –   Switch Security Practices
     –   Access Control Lists
     –   Services Not in Use
     –   Administration Practices
     –   Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)
     –   Anti-Spoofing and Source Routing
     –   Logging




P4
Switch and Router Basics




                http://www.home-network-help.com/ip-forwarding.html

P5
Switch and Router Basics
Switches and Routers can be thought of as the major interchanges
Switches are the evolving descendents of the network hub
 – To overcome the performance shortcomings of hubs, switches were
   developed. These are intelligent devices that learn the various MAC
   address of connected devices and will only transmit packets to the devices
   they were specifically addressed to.
 – They provide security benefit by reducing the ability to monitor or “sniff”
   another workstation’s traffic.
 – Thus, with a switch, every workstation will only see its own traffic.




P6
Switches

Shortcomings of Switches:
– A switched network cannot totally eliminate the ability to sniff traffic.
– A hacker can trick a local network segment into sending it another
  workstation’s traffic with an attack known as Address Resolution Protocol
  (ARP) poisoning.
– ARP poisoning works by forging replies to ARP broadcast.
– E.g. Attacker would broadcast an ARP packet onto the network containing
  Victim’s IP address but Attacker’s MAC address.

Possible Solution

– In order to overcome ARP poisoning attacks, segregate sensitive hosts
  between two layer three devices or use virtual LAN (VLAN) functionality on
  switches. For high sensitive host may wish to statically define important
  MAC entries such as default gateway



P7
Routers




P8
Routers

Routers operate at layer three, the network layer (IP) of the OSI model.

 – Used to move traffic between different networks and between different
   section of the same network
 – Have ability to perform IP packet filtering
 – Learn the locations of various networks in two ways
        • Via routing protocol
        • Via manually via static routes
        • Networks use a combination of the two to get reliable connectivity
            between all necessary networks
 – Static routes are needed
        • e.g. firewalls do not normally run routing protocols
        • If a firewall is not informing the network of any networks behind it,
            those routes must be statically added to a network router and
            propagated.




P9
Routing Protocols

Two types of routing protocols:
 – Distance-vector protocols: more simplistic and better suited for smaller
   networks and maintain tables of distances to other network.
 – Link-state protocols: develop to address the specific needs of larger
   networks and use link-speed metrics to determine the best route to another
   network.


Choosing a routing protocol, one should check:
 – Network size
 – Firewall is not vulnerable to a routing protocol attack




P10
Network Hardening

In order to securely configure the device, one needs

 – Patches: updated released by the product vendor in timely manner
 – Switch security practices: MAC addresses are unique for every network
   interface card, and switches can be configured to allow only specific
   MAC address to send traffic via a specific port on the switch, known as
   “port security”
 – Access control lists (ACLs): Permit or deny TCP and UDP traffic on the
   source or destination address, or both, as well as on the TCP or UDP
   port numbers contained in a packet.
        • Router ACLs can increase network security by using border
           routers to drop unwanted traffic, removing the burden from the
           border firewalls.




P11
Network Hardening

Administrative Practices

 – Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP): SNMP can be used to
   monitor such things as link operation and CPU load
 – The Simple Network Management Protocol
        1. Protocol operations
        2. Transport mappings
        3. Security and administration
 – First defined in RFC 1157 (SNMPv1)
 – Separate documents beginning in SNMPv2
 – Security and administration completed in SNMPv3
 – SNMP can manage devices that can alert personnel to detect problems
   by sending traps to configured consoles




P12
Network Hardening

Administrative Practices

 – Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv3):
       • Security
             –   authentication
             –   Privacy

        •   Administration
             –   Authorization and view-based access control
             –   Logical contexts
             –   Naming of entities, identities, and information
             –   People and policies
             –   Usernames and key management
             –   Notification destinations and proxy relationships
             –   Remotely configurable via SNMP operations




P13
Network Hardening

Administrative Practices

 – Threats protected against by SNMPv3:
       • Masquerade/data origin authentication: interloper assumes the
          identity of a sender to gain its privileges
       • Modification of information/data integrity: alteration of in-transit
          messages
       • Message stream modification: messages are re-ordered,
          delayed, or replayed
       • Disclosure/data confidentiality: privileged information is
          obtained via eavesdropping on messages




P14
Network Hardening

Administrative Practices


 – SNMPv3 uses MD5 and DES as “symmetric,” i.e., secret key
   mechanisms:
         •   (MD5 = Message Digest Algorithm 5, RFC 1321)
         •   (DES = Data Encryption Standard)
 – User Based Authentication Mechanims:MD5 message digest algorithm
   in HMAC
       • indirectly provides data origin authentication
       • directly defends against data modification attacks
       • uses private key known by both sender and receiver
       • 16 byte key
       • 128 bit digest (truncated to 96 bits)
 – SHA an optional alternative algorithm
 – Loosely synchronized monotonically increasing time indicator values
       • defends against certain message stream modification attacks


P15
Network Hardening

Administrative Practices

 – User Based Privacy Mechanism on:

 1. Symmetric encryption used Data Encryption Standard (DES) Cipher
    Block Chaining (CBC) mode
         • provides privacy / protection against disclosure
         • uses encryption
         • subject to export and use restrictions in many jurisdictions
 2. 16 byte key (8 bytes DES key, 8 byte DES initialization vector)
 3. Multiple levels of compliance with respect to DES due to problems
    associated with international use




P16
Network Hardening

Internet Control Message Protocol

 – ICMP provides a mechanism for reporting TCP/IP communication
   problems, as well as utilities for testing IP layer connectivity
 – ICMP is defined by RFC792, which details many different types of
   ICMP communications, commonly know as messages.




P17
Summary

• Routers and switches provide a number of mechanisms to
  enhance the overall security and performance of local network
• Switches reduce the risks of sniffing-based attacks against other
  local workstation, and they can further reduce risks via the
  strategic implementation of VLANs
• Routers provide the ability to implement ACLs to screen and drop
  unwanted traffic. Also, taking the time to harden the router
  against attacks will also increase the security of the network
• SNMPv3 provides security and administrations for protecting
  against masquerading, modifications, data confidentiality and
  entity authentication
• Proactive control of ICMP can prevent an attacker form learning
  significant information about network topologies


P18
Introduction to Secure Network Design


All information systems create risks to an organization.


The goal of secure network design is to enable authorized
communications while mitigating information risk to acceptable levels:


 1. Acceptable Risk
 2. Designing Security into a Network
        •   Network Design Models
 3. Designing an Appropriate Network
 4. The Cost of Security




P19
Introduction to Secure Network Design

Acceptable Risk
 – Security Policy
       • This makes an Information Security Officer job easier and
           your network more secure
       • Definition: A formal statement of the rules by which people
           who are given access to an organization’s technology and
           information assets must abide
       • Acts as a road map to guide in the design and operation of
           the security within your network
       • The design and configuration of the infrastructure becomes
           the enforcement of those documents.
       • Can measure the security of the network against
           conformance to the policy
 – Guidelines – an organization’s best practices
 – Standards – the minimum set of operations criteria for a certain
   technology or asset




P20
Introduction to Secure Network Design


Designing Security into a Network

 – Security is easily overlooked aspects of network design, and try to fit
   existing network can be expensive and difficult to implement
   properly
 – For example, firewalls, IDS, to secure and monitor multiple
   application systems.




P21
Introduction to Secure Network Design


Designing Security into a Network

 – Network design Models:
       • Networks built with many connections to other networks will
          be harder to secure due to the number of access control
          mechanisms
       • Not all screening is explicit such as shopping mall, airport,
          federal prisons
       • Different security requirements for low and high risk groups
       • All the above mentioned elements can be translated into
          network design such as firewall, access control systems,
          monitoring and controlling traffic movements and detect
          unauthorized activities.




P22
Introduction to Secure Network Design


Designing an Appropriate Network

 –    Number of requirements and expectations for a network
 –    Organization availability, performance requirements
 –    Protecting sensitive network assets
 –    Setting up efficient and secure links to other networks
 –    Ability to provide levels of security with any risks associated with the
      assets on that network




P23
Introduction to Secure Network Design


Designing an Appropriate Network

 – Design and maintain a network
 – Understanding of what are required by network architects, engineers
   and users
 – It is vital to understand your network needs with regards to
   performance, security and controls.




P24
Introduction to Secure Network Design



The Cost of Security

 – Determine the organization’s costs for each security breach.
 – This helps management to determine the value to the organization of
   the various security control mechanisms.
 – Consider an expected loss so determine appropriate spending levels




P25
Performance

The network will play a huge rule in meeting the performance
requirements:

 – Determine the appropriate network technology to meet the bandwidth
   requirements projected for two or three years in the future.

 – Also consider implementing QoS for providing appropriate bandwidth and
   giving priority applications.

 – Filtering, compressing, encrypting and address-translating operations
   should be performed at the access and distribution layers.

 – The network is highly segmented, a single network failure at the access
   or distribution layers does not affect the entire network.




P26
Availability


Network availability requires that systems are resilient and available to
users on a timely basis.
 – DoS: Unavailable systems cost organizations real dollars in lost revenue
 – Avoid single points of failure within the architecture


Solutions: Implementing a redundant firewall or router solution is to
achieving a full high-availability network architecture.
 – Good availability design will incorporate redundant hardware components
   at the switch, network, firewall, and application levels
 – Also consider maintaining multiple internet links to different service
   providers to insulate an organization from problems at any one provider




P27
 Security




                              }   Zones



Servers                    DMZ (web servers)
            Workstations

 P28
Security

A firewall is a machine that monitors all traffic to and from a site
This allows for monitoring, filtering, logging, and proper access to the
network




               administered                      public
                 network                        Internet



P29
Security

Designing and implementing security in network and system
architectures, it is helpful to identify critical security control and
understand the consequences of a failure in those controls.

Securing individual nodes on the network, it is important to secure the
network as a whole.

Perimeter security is only as strong as its weakest link.

Good practices for reducing risks include periodic auditing of the
external networks and implement firewalls to permit only those
communications required to conduct business.



P30
Security

Wireless Impact on the Perimeter


Remote Access Considerations


Internal Security Practices


Intranets, Extranets and DMZs


Host Hardening


Outbound Filtering


P31
Security

Remote Access Considerations

 – Most organization networks allow user access to internal resource from
   remote locations.
 – Remote access is now generally provided via a Virtual Private Network
   (VPN)
 – Risk: Attackers may gain access to an unprotected PC, the VPN could
   be used to tunnel traffic past the organization firewalls and the protection
   they provided.
 – Solution: Security administrators should ensure that adequate protection
   is implemented over the endpoints.
        • E.g. a host can only communicate inside the VPN, thus
           preventing a remote user from using it as a conduit.




P32
Security

                          VPN via Firewall




                                                             1. Client


              3. Host




                                           2. Client


           1. Firewalls and Routers share an encryption key.
           2. Client and Firewall share an encryption key.
           3. Firewall and Host share an encryption key.


P33
Security

Internal Security Practices
 – Organizations deploy firewalls strictly around the perimeter of their
   network leave themselves vulnerable to internally initiated attacks such
   as logic bombs, Trojan horse and virus.


Intranets, Extranet and DMZs
 – Intranets: To provide internal users with access to applications and
   information securely.
 – Extranets: These are company-controlled application networks that are
   made available to trusted external parties.
 – DMZs: An organization may want to provide public Internet access to
   certain systems.
        • E.g. a company to receive Internet e-mail, the e-mail server must
           be made available to the Internet.



P34
Security

Host Hardening
 – The practice of disabling unnecessary services and reconfiguring other
   services for greater security is often referred to as host hardening.


Outbound Filtering
 – Failure to restrict outbound access creates a number of risks. E.g. failure
   to filter traffic leaving the organization network may allow an attacker to
   use the network to launch attacks on other networks
 – Web Access Considerations: organizations could configure their
   infrastructure to permit access to specific categories of web sites while
   denying access to others such as pornography, games and music sites.




P35
Security

Outbound Filtering
 – Outbound Port Filtering: It will prevent users from using applications that
   are dangerous or are not business related in the corporate environment.
 – Instant Messaging: IM allows users to “chat” with other users connected
   to the IM system
        • Pros: Valuable business tool for audio and video conferencing
            and usage reporting. Thus, save money and travel costs.
        • Cons: IM clients do not provide any sort of transport encryption,
            leaving such communications open to passive monitoring and
            eavesdropping.
        • Solutions: encrypting IM for audio and video conferencing




P36
Summary

The goal of network security is to enable authorized communications
while mitigating information risk to acceptable level.

The network will play a huge rule in meeting the performance
requirements such as implementing QoS, filtering and encrypting.

Network availability requires that systems are resilient and available to
users on a timely basis.

Designing and implementing security in network and system
architectures, it is helpful to identify critical security control and
understand the consequences of a failure in those controls.



P37
