Computer and Network Security
Dr. Chan Yeob Yeun


Week 5 - 6
Weekly Lecture Plan
     Wk          Contents             Cmt       Wk               Contents               Cmt
     1    Introduction                          9    Foundations of Network
                                                     Security II

     2    Foundations of           Tutorial     10   Network-Based Threats and
          Computer and Network     Assig Plan        Attacks
          Security
     3    Identification and                    11   Network Security Protocols I    Quiz 2
          Authentication I

     4    Identification and                    12   Network Security Protocols II
          Authentication II
     5    Access Control                        13   Firewalls


     6    Modern Computer          Quiz 1       14   IDS / IPS                       Assig
          Attacks                                                                    Submit


     7    Malicious Code           Assig        15   Revision and Presentation
                                   Confirm


     8    Foundations of Network                16   Exam
          Security I




P2
Outline


Access Control
Introduction
ACL
Bell-La Padula
Biba
Partial Ordering
Role-Based Access Control




P3
Access Control


Access Control consists of two steps:
Authentication
      • Who or what is the subject (s)
Authorization
      • Who or what is trusted to access object (o)




P4
Access Control


We are going to look at several formal models for access control.
Most of these models have the same structure:
The entities are divided into subjects and objects
The notion of a “secure state” is defined
The permitted transitions from one state to another is defined by the
access control policy
It is shown that these permissions move the system from a secure
state to a secure state
Provided the system starts in a secure state, and the policies are
enforced correctly, the system will remain in a secure state




P5
Authentication & Access Control

                         authentication                           authorisation
                                                                                             ACL




                                      s                                                o


     principal                   access                   reference                 object
                                 request                   monitor


B. Lampson, M. Abadi, M. Burrows, E. Wobber: Authentication in Distributed Systems: Theory
and Practice, ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, 10(4), pages 265-310, 1992




P6
Authorisation

An active entity, called ‘principal’ or ‘subject’, requests access to a passive
entity, called ‘object’.
Authorisation: The reference monitor decides whether access is granted or
denied.
The reference monitor has to find and evaluate the (automated) security
policy relevant for the current request.
User identities are one of the parameters considered in security policies.
Subjects operate on behalf of human users we call principals, and access
is based on the principal’s name bound to the subject in some unforgeable
manner at authentication time.
Because access control structures identify principals, it is important that
principal names be globally unique, human-readable and memorable,
easily and reliably associated with known people. [M. Gasser, 1990]




P7
Unix Access Rights


                     Access operations applied to a
Three access operations:
 read: from a file  directory:
write: to a file           read: list contents
execute: a file            write: create or rename files in the directory
                            execute: search directory




    These operations differ from the Bell-LaPadula model. Unix write
    access does not imply read access.

    Moral: Do not use your own intuition when interpreting access
    operations someone else has defined!


                                                         P8
         P8
More Access Rights

     Policies for creating and deleting files can be expressed by
      access controls on the directory (Unix)
      specific create and delete rights (Windows, OpenVMS)

     Policies for defining security settings such as access rights could
     be handled similarly:
      access control on the directory
      specific rights like grant and revoke

     Rights in CORBA: get, set, use, manage




P9
Who Sets the Policy?


  Security policies specify how principals are given access to objects. Two
  options for deciding who is in charge of setting the policy:

      The owner of a resource decrees who is allowed access. Such
      policies are called discretionary as access control is at the owner’s
      discretion.
      A system wide policy decrees who is allowed access. Such policies
      are called mandatory.




P10
Access Control Structures

Requirements on access control structures:
 1. The access control structure should help to express your
    desired access control policy.
 2. You should be able to check that your policy has been captured
    correctly.

Access rights can be defined individually for each combination of subject and
object.

For large numbers of subjects and objects, such structures are cumbersome
to manage. Intermediate levels of control are preferable.




P11
Access Control Matrix

 We specify for each combination of subject and object the operations
 that are permitted.
 When all your users (principals) are known individually, you can
 express your policy in an access control matrix, with a row for each
 principal and a column for each object


                      bill.doc         edit.exe        fun.com

         Alice           -             {exec}         {exec,read}

          Bob       {read,write}       {exec}      {exec,read,write}




P12
Access Control Matrix continued


The access control matrix is
 an abstract concept,
 not very suitable for direct implementation,
 not very convenient for managing security.
How do you answer the question: Has your security policy been
implemented correctly?

Bell-LaPadula (Orange Book): access control matrix defines mandatory
access control (MAC).




P13
Capabilities

 Focus on the subject:
  access rights are stored with the subject
  capabilities  rows of the access control matrix


             Alice          edit.exe: {exec}         fun.com: {exec,read}

 Subjects may grant rights to other subjects. Subjects may grant the right
 to grant rights.

 How to check who may access a specific object?

 How to revoke a capability?

 Distributed system security has created renewed interest in capabilities.



P14
Access Control Lists (ACLs)

Focus on the object:
 access rights are stored with the object.
 ACLs  columns of the access control matrix.

           fun.com         Alice: {exec}        Bill: {exec,read,write}


How to check access rights of a specific subject?

ACLs are implemented in most commercial operating systems but their
actual use is limited.

Referring to individual users in a policy works best within organisations.

A management overhead has to be paid.



 P15
Groups


Alice and Bob are students in a large class; the lecturer wants to give
students access to some documents;

Entering all names into several ACLs is tedious so the lecturer
defines a group, declares the students to be members of the group,
and puts the group into the ACLs

Access rights are often defined for groups:
 Unix: owner, group, others




P16
Roles and RBAC
 Alternatively, in our example we could have created a role ‘student’.

 Definition: A role is a collection of procedures assigned to users; a
 user can have more than one role and more than one user can have
 the same role.
 The lecturer would create a procedure for reading course material
 and assign this procedure to the role ‘student’.

 A role ‘course tutor’ could be assigned a procedure for updating
 documents.

 Procedures: ‘high level’ access operations with a more complex
 semantic than read or write; procedures can only be applied to
 objects of certain data types.
 Example: funds transfer between bank accounts.



P17
Access Control
Discretionary Access Control (DAC)
Within discretionary access control, some of the control remains at the
discretion of the object’s owner, or anyone else who is authorized to control
access to the object. The owner can determine who should have access rights
to an object and what those rights should be. Commercial environments
typically use DAC to allow anyone in a group to have access to a file. Typically
DAC access rights can be changed dynamically.
Mandatory Access Control (MAC)
Mandatory access control means that the access control policy decisions are
made beyond the control of an individual owner of an object. A central authority
determines what information can be accessible by whom, and the owner cannot
change access rights. An example of MAC occurs in military security, where an
individual data owner does not decide who has a top-secret clearance, nor can
the owner change the classification of an object from top-secret to secret.




P18
Access Control

Two methods are commonly used for applying mandatory
access control:
  Rule-based access controls: This type of control further defines specific
     conditions for access to a requested object. Each object will have an
     associated Access Control List (ACL) that can express the conditions
     necessary for authorized access. When an object is requested, the
     system will lookup the corresponding ACL, and see if it is allowed.
     Examples of what the ACL can depend on include properties of the
     subject, the action requested or the context.
  Lattice-based access controls: These can be used for complex access
     control decisions involving multiple objects and/or subjects. A lattice
     model is a mathematical structure that defines greatest lower-bound and
     least upper-bound values for a pair of elements, such as a subject and
     an object. When deciding whether to grant access or not, the system will
     input the properties of the subject and object into the lattice and use
     explicit properties to decide.


P19
Access Control Lists

Access Control Lists (ACL)
An ACL is a mechanism for expressing authorization rules separately for
each object. Each object has one such list and the list shows all subjects
who should have access and what kind of access they have been granted.
The important question of who can modify ACLs will depend on whether the
system is based on DAC or MAC.


As the name suggests, the permissions in an ACL are arranged in a list.
When the system is querying the list, it will start at the top and search
through until it finds a match (in terms of the subject and the operation
requested). How partial matches are handled (i.e. if the subject requests
multiple operations on the object and each rule only specifies one) will vary
from system to system.




P20
Access Rights - Bell-La Padula Model

The Bell-La Padula model is a formal description of the allowable paths of
information flow within a secure system. The goal of the model is to identify
allowable communication where it is important to maintain secrecy.
              • Preventing the unauthorized disclosure of information
              • Unauthorized alternation of information is secondary


The Bell-La Padula security model only allows a subject to access an object in two
ways: read or write.
The security class of an object “o” is denoted by the function C(o).
•      The security class of a subject “s” is denoted by the function C(s).
Typical security classes are Top-Secret, Secret, Confidential, Restricted and
   Unclassified.
    D. Bell and L. La Padula, “Secure Computing Systems: Mathematical Foundation and Model”, MITRE Report,
    MTR 2547 v2, 1973.


     P21
Bell-La Padula Model
Simple Security Property
       “A subject s may have read access to an object o only if C(o)  C(s)”
       This says that the security class (clearance) of the subject receiving a piece of
        information must be at least as high as the class (classification) of the
        information.

*-Property (Star Property)
       “A subject s who has read access to an object o may have write access to an
        object p only if C(o)  C(p)”
       This says that a subject obtaining information at one level may pass that
        information along only to other subjects at levels no lower that the
        information. This property is to prevent the Write-Down of information, which
        occurs when a subject with write access to high-level data transfers that data
        by writing it to a low-level object.

       • Discretionary Security Property
       “A subject s may access an object o if that right is contained in the discretionary
        access control matrix.”


 P22
Implications of the Bell-La Padula Model


                                                  Top Secret       O5

                                                    Write

                                                                  Read
                                                     S2                     O4   Secret
                                                                Write                     Sensitivity
                                                                                          of Objects

                           Confidential           Read
                                            O3                                               Trust
                                                                                          of Subjects
                              Write


                                           Read
                                S1                   O2        Restricted
                                          Write

                             Read
       Unclassified   O1




 P23
Access Control

  The security models discussed have been focused primarily on
  confidentiality, in particular Bell-La Padula. Many commercial and
  industrial firms are more dependent on the accuracy of their data
  rather than preventing disclosure. We will now take a wider look at
  security models, and introduce a model for integrity policies.
  The goals of any integrity model are:
  1.Prevent unauthorized users from making modifications to data or
  programs
  2.Prevent authorized users from making improper or unauthorized
  modifications to data or programs
  3.Maintain the internal and external consistency of data and programs




P24
Requirements for preserving data integrity


1.Users will not write their own programs, but will use existing production
programs and databases.
2.Programmers will develop and test programs on a nonproduction system; if
they need access to actual data, they will be given production data via a special
process, but will use it on their development system.
3.A special process must be followed to install a program from the development
system onto the production system.
4.The special process in requirement 3 must be controlled and audited.
5.The managers and auditors must have access to both the system state and the
system logs that are generated.



  S. Lipner, “Non-Discretionary Controls for Commercial Applications,” Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 111-112 (May 1999)



P25
Requirements for preserving data integrity

      These requirements amount to:
      Separation of duty
       o Developer and auditor
      Separation of function
       o Development system and production system
      Auditing
      o System logs




P26
The Biba Model

In 1977, Kenneth J. Biba described a security policy designed to preserve data
integrity. It can be considered the opposite of Bell-La Padula. Biba uses
basically the same notation as previous models.


S is the set of subjects, O is the set of objects. Instead of security levels, we
have integrity levels. These refer to the trustworthiness of the objects. The
levels are ordered, and the function i() returns the integrity level of a subject or
object.


There are three actions that are considered,
         a subject reading an object,
         a subject writing to an object,
         and a subject invoking (executing) another subject.




P27
The Biba Model (cont.)

Integrity levels have a very different meaning that security levels. Data at a
higher integrity level is more accurate and/or reliable than data at a lower
level. The higher the level, the more confidence one has that a program using
the data will execute correctly.


Integrity levels inhibit the modification of information, security levels
limit the flow of information.




P28
The Biba Model (cont.)

The three rules of the Biba model are:
1. s ∈ S can read o ∈ O if and only if i(s) ≤ i(o).
2. s ∈ S can write to o ∈ O if and only if i(o) ≤ i(s).
3. s1 ∈ S can execute s2 ∈ S if and only if i(s2) ≤ i(s1).


The first rule prevents a subject reading any data at a lower integrity
level. If this were to happen then the subject would be contaminated
by having to rely on data less reliable than its level (its integrity level
would no longer be accurate).


This contamination is equivalent to disclosure in Bell-La Padula, it is
what we are trying to prevent.


P29
The Biba Model (cont.)
  2. s ∈ S can write to o ∈ O if and only if i(o) ≤ i(s).
  This rule prevents a subject from one level writing to a higher level. If
      a subject were to alter a more trusted object, it could implant
      incorrect or false data (because the subject is less trusted than
      the object).
  3. s1 ∈ S can execute s2 ∈ S if and only if i(s2) ≤ i(s1).
  The third rule allows a subject to execute another subject provided
     the second subject is not at a higher integrity level. This is to
     prevent an invoker corrupting the execution of a more trusted
     subject. Execution is treated the same way as writing (contrast
     with Bell-La Padula).
  So no matter how many different read and write operations are performed by
      any number of subjects, by enforcing these three rules, it is impossible
      for data at a low integrity level to corrupt data at a higher level.

  FreeBSD has implemented the Biba model in its kernel.

P30
Partial Ordering

 The Bell-La Padula and Biba model define classes/classifications
 (security/integrity) for subjects and objects. This can be further
 refined into categories. The levels follow a strict (total) order
 (UNCLASSIFIED, CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET, TOP SECRET).
 Categories are arranged in what is called a Partial Ordering.

 Each object can be assigned multiple categories. These are
 descriptors for the type of information contained. There is no
 quantitative measure for comparing them, but we still have to
 determine which is higher or lower for Bell-La Padula (no reads up)
 and Biba (no reads down).




P31
Partial Ordering

A partial ordering is any comparison (≤) that obeys certain properties:
1.a ≤ a (reflexivity)
2.a ≤ b and b ≤ a ⇒ a = b (Antisymmetry)
3.a ≤ b and b ≤ c ⇒ a ≤ c (Transitivity)
This comparison needs only be defined for certain pairs of elements
(hence partial). Ordinarily, using less-than-or-equal over the numbers
defines a total-ordering. If we were to define an ordering as follows:
Scissors ≤ Rock, Paper ≤ Scissors, Rock ≤ Paper
this would not be a partial ordering, as it violates property 3.
When talking about compartments, we say c1 ≤ c2 if c1 ⊆ c2
For example: if c1 = {A,B}, c2 = {A,B,C} then c1 ≤ c2



P32
Partial Ordering of categories


                    {Army, Navy, Airforce}



 {Army, Navy}         {Army, Airforce}                 {Navy, Airforce}




      {Army}               {Navy}
                                                          {Airforce}




                              {}

                                             Arrows go from greater to lesser




P33
Partial Ordering

 Originally we defined Bell La-Padula in terms of security classes. Now
 we define it in terms of security levels, where the level is the
 combination of class and category:
 E.g. Subject S might have (SECRET, {Army, Navy}), and Object O
 might have (TOP SECRET, {Army, Navy, Airforce})
 The security level (L,C) dominates the security level (L’,C’) if and only
 if:
                         L’ ≤ L   and     C’ ⊆ C
 The classification L’ has to be less than L, and the categories C’ must
 be contained in C. In BLP, the exact same rules remain (“no read up”,
 “no write down”), but we now make all comparisons using both classes
 and categories.



P34
Partial Ordering


There are two forms of Tranquility:
Strong Tranquility states that security levels do not change during the
lifetime of the system
Weak Tranquility states that security levels do not change in a way
that violates the rules of a given security policy.
An example of weak tranquility is using trusted entities that remove
all sensitive information from a highly classified objected before its
classification is changed to a lower one.




P35
Examples


Consider a Bell-La Padula implementation with the following security
classifications: TOP     SECRET,    SECRET,       CONFIDENTIAL,
UNCLASSIFIED, and the following categories: Army, Navy, Airforce.
Who has what access to which documents of the below, and what
kind?

  Name     Security Level         Document    Security Level
  Alan     SECRET, {Army, Navy}   Doc1        CONFIDENTIAL,
                                              {Army}
  Brian    SECRET, {Army, Navy,   Doc2        SECRET, {Navy,
           Airforce}                          Airforce}
  Clive    CONFIDENTIAL, {Navy}   Doc3        SECRET, {Navy}
  Dan      TOP SECRET, {Army,     Doc4        UNCLASSIFIED, {}
           Navy, Airforce}



P36
Examples


Consider a Biba implementation with the following integrity levels:
CRUCIAL, VERY IMPORTANT, IMPORTANT, TRIVIAL and the
following categories: Abu Dhabi, Dubai and Sharjah.


  Name     Integrity Level             Document   Integrity Level
  Alan     CRUCIAL, {Abu Dhabi}        Doc1       IMPORTANT, {Abu
                                                  Dhabi}
  Brian    VERY IMPORTANT {Abu         Doc2       VERY IMPORTANT,
           Dhabi, Sharjah}                        {Dubai}
  Clive    IMPORTANT, {Abu Dhabi,      Doc3       CRUCIAL, {Sharjah}
           Dubai}
  Dan      CRUCIAL, {Dubai, Sharjah}   Doc4       VERY IMPORTANT,
                                                  {Dubai, Sharjah}




P37
Role Based Access Control

 Motivation
 Mandatory Access Control can be quite restrictive. Access control
 models such as Bell La-Padula are only applicable in situations where
 confidentiality is of the utmost concern. Most commercial environments
 will have different priorities, for example integrity of information.
 Discretionary Access Control allows users to grant or revoke rights for
 objects under their control, without the interference of an administrator.
 This does not always reflect the desired security policy.
 It is more often the case that individuals do not own resources, but
 need access to them according to their job responsibilities. The
 organization is the “owner” of the resources.
 Fortunately, there is another model that retains the central control of a
 single administrator, but is flexible enough for commercial use.


P38
RBAC

In role-based access control (RBAC), the permissions to perform
certain operations are assigned to specific roles.
Members of staff (or other system users) are assigned particular
roles
 Through those role assignments, users acquire the permissions to perform
 particular system functions.
Since users are not assigned permissions directly, but only acquire
them through their role (or roles), management of individual user
rights becomes a matter of simply assigning appropriate roles to the
user
 this simplifies common operations, such as adding a user, or changing a
 user's department.




P39
RBAC Model




P40
Using RBAC to manage access




P41
MAC vs. RBAC


In RBAC, you don't need to modify and manage access control lists
(ACLs), as the case for MAC.
ACLs created several challenges
 modifying ACLs without causing unintended consequences,
 maintaining ACL modifications through upgrades, and
 troubleshooting problems that occurred due to using ACLs in a
 nonstandard way.




P42
Role Based Access Control

 Role Hierarchy
 Roles can be arranged in hierarchies where one contains all the
 transactions of the other(s). This reduces redundancy where one role
 needs all the rights of another in addition to their own specific rights.
 This can be a simple way to delegate authority.
 Note that containment of transactions might be the same way as the
 organizational hierarchy, or it could be inverted.

      Senior Engineer       Project Supervisor        Senior Programmer


                  Test Engineer           Programmer


                               Project Member

P43
Role Based Access Control

  Constraints
  As well as prohibiting mutually exclusive roles, there are other constraints
  that may be desirable in RBAC. It might be necessary to limit:
  Particularly sensitive permissions to a single role, to reduce the chances
  of misuse.
  General membership in roles, e.g. a subject can be a programmer and a
  tester, but not on the same project.
  The number of allowed subjects assigned to a role.
  The number of allowed roles a subject may be assigned to/active.
  Certain roles may have prerequisite roles.
  Many of these are dependent on the correct mapping of subjects to real
  people. No protection can be assured if someone gains multiple IDs.



P44
The Chinese Wall Model

  The Chinese Wall model was proposed by Brewer and Nash in
  19891, and its main aim is to prevent conflicts of interest.
  Any organization that has different clients in the same market needs
  to be wary of conflicts of interest. If they have any sensitive
  information on one, that could be of competitive advantage to the
  other, then this information leaking is a risk (legal, financial, etc).
  Consultancies, investment houses, legal firms all have to content with
  this problem, and all firms are required to take measures to prevent
  insider trading.
  In essence:
  There must be no information flow that causes a conflict of interest.


  1. Brewer, Nash, “The Chinese Wall Security Policy”, IEEE Symposium on Research
  in Security and Privacy, 1989.

P45
